# STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION JIC V1.0 07 October 2009 Sections 1 - 3

## 1.  INTRODUCTION 

The Strategic Communication (SC) Joint Integrating Concept (JIC) describes how a joint force commander (JFC) circa 2016-2028 might plan and execute joint operations to achieve strategic communication objectives within the context of a broader national effort.  The joint force is an instrument of national power.  It exists to create or maintain conditions that support U.S. national interests—although it is certainly not the only instrument that does this and can rarely succeed alone.  The most obvious and extreme way that joint forces do this is through direct physical compulsion in the form of combat operations that seek to impose the desired conditions upon an adversary by force.  There will be many situations, however, in which compulsion is neither desirable nor feasible.  Joint forces must therefore also be able to indirectly affect the choices that other political actors or groups make—although, again, joint forces can rarely do this alone.  To do this, joint forces must be able to plan and execute operations to achieve strategic communication objectives, the subject of this concept. 

## 2.  PURPOSE 

This concept comprises three objectives: 
 1. First, to inform operational decision-making in current and future joint operations.  While the concept’s primary aim is to influence force planning, it also provides ideas that could help operational commanders plan and execute joint operations to achieve strategic communication objectives more effectively with current capabilities. 
 2. Second, to provide a common intellectual framework for all subsequent force planning with respect to strategic communication, including (1) experimentation into future strategic communication methods and capabilities, (2) identification and implementation of required institutional changes, and (3) programmatic, budgetary, organizational and other force planning decisions. 
 3. Third, to provide the conceptual basis for performing a capability based assessment (CBA) within the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS).  The concept will do this by identifying an initial set of required strategic communication capabilities, with associated tasks and measures, and providing the logical basis for these capabilities. 

 ## 3.  SCOPE 
 
This concept describes how a joint force commander might plan and execute joint operations to achieve strategic communication objectives in 2016-2028 within the context of a larger, national or coalition effort.  Strategic communication is defined as “Focused United States Government efforts to understand and engage key audiences to create, strengthen, or preserve conditions favorable for the advancement of United States Government interests, policies, and objectives through the use of coordinated programs, plans, themes, messages, and products synchronized with the actions of all instruments of national power.” Strategic communication essentially means sharing meaning (i.e., communicating) in support of national objectives (i.e., strategically).  This involves listening as much as transmitting.  It applies not only to information, but also to physical communication—that is, action that conveys meaning.  While strategic communication is a national effort involving much more than military actions, this concept will concentrate on the joint force’s contribution to this broader effort. 

The applicability of this concept is very broad.  Strategic communication occurs across the full range of military operations.  It is a continuous function that applies to greater or lesser extent to all joint operating concepts and operational (vice functional) joint integrating concepts and to all phases of a campaign.  Joint forces communicate strategically with friends, adversaries and others alike.  Joint forces communicate strategically with general populaces, governments, and other organizations.  Joint forces communicate strategically in the context of conflict, competition and cooperation.  Strategic communication includes efforts to communicate with domestic audiences within statutory restrictions, mostly through public affairs.

For scoping purposes, this concept discusses strategic communication in universal terms that integrate and synchronize specific disciplines or organizations.  It will not prescribe the individual execution of public affairs (PA), psychological operations (PSYOP), 
defense support to public diplomacy (DSPD), or other activities that contribute to strategic communication.  Appendix D provides a comprehensive vignette that illustrates strategic communication efforts in a futuristic scenario.

### Note
By definition, psychological operations target only foreign audiences.  The U.S. Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948 (Public Law 80-402) prohibits domestic dissemination of information intended for foreign audiences. 