# STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION JIC V1.0 07 October 2009 Section 4

## 4.  THE MILITARY PROBLEM:  INFLUENCING OTHER REGIONAL AND GLOBAL ACTORS 

This strategic communication concept deals with the challenge of convincing others to think and act in ways compatible with our objectives, whether this means causing them to adopt a specific course of action or to simply understand us better and accept us more.  The future joint force commander must be able to plan and execute joint operations to affect the behaviors of selected populations, governments or other decision-making groups to accomplish the mission and promote broader national interests in a socially complex and globally interconnected information environment.  A key dimension of this challenge is integrating all the various communication activities of the joint force with each other and with other operational capabilities to maximize their combined effect and likewise to coordinate these actions with those of any partners. 

The joint force is primarily an instrument of compulsion, which is the act of imposing a desired effect upon an adversary, regardless of his interests or efforts.  Additionally, the joint force commander must also be able to exert influence, which is the act of affecting another’s attitudes, opinions or behaviors—causing the other to support or not frustrate joint force actions.  Influence thus requires volition on the part of the other.  The desired effect can be an observable behavior or an unobservable emotion, 
opinion, belief or attitude.  Examples of desired influence effects on particular audiences include assuring existing allies and supporters, attracting new allies and supporters, deterring potential enemies, and discrediting adversaries. 

The term influence sometimes carries negative connotations because the term is often associated with deceptive manipulation or exploitation.  Influence will not have that connotation in this concept.[1] Many influence attempts are open, straightforward and even virtuous.  Education can be very influential.  Many forms of influence can be mutually beneficial.  Any form of cooperation, for example, is a form of mutual influence.  Influence is a pervasive and fundamental form of any social interaction, as essential to cooperation as it is to competition or conflict. 

Affecting the behaviors of people who retain freedom of action is a very challenging undertaking, especially if these people are initially disposed against us.  In most circumstances, there are very definite limits to one actor’s ability to cause another to think or do what he otherwise would not.  In the future, the challenge of influence will be critical because success in the globally interconnected information environment will frequently be less a matter of imposing one’s will and more a matter of ideas and example. 

The requirement to influence through strategic communication is pervasive.  The joint force commander will be required to engage adversaries, friends, and others alike.  He will be required to engage general populations, governments and a variety of other state and nonstate bodies.  He will be required to communicate in cooperative, competitive and conflict situations.  He will be required to communicate proactively in support of established objectives, in anticipation of uncontrollable events, and in reaction to unforeseen events.  He will be required to coordinate a variety of joint capabilities in support of strategic communication goals.  He will be required to do any of these things deliberatively or rapidly, depending on circumstances. 

Efforts to influence others range from gentle and indirect to forceful and direct.  See Figure 1, The Influence Spectrum.  On the gentle/indirect end of the spectrum is simple informing—providing objective information in an unbiased way, in the belief that the facts will indirectly lead to the expected response.  On the forceful/direct end is straightforward pressure, which pushes directly for a specific outcome—either inducement by promises of rewards for compliance or coercion by threats of punishment for defiance.  In between are education, open advocacy, urging and other forms of persuasion that attempt to change the considerations that affect attitudes and decisions.

**Communication as the Mechanism of Influence**
Influence is exerted through communication, specifically through reception, comprehension and acceptance of a message.  The ability to influence is only as strong as the ability to communicate preferences.  Influencing effectively means communicating effectively.  In fact, the fundamental purpose of all purposeful communication is to influence—to cause some intended effect, which might be an observable behavior or an unobservable attitude.[2]

Communication is the act of sharing meaning by sending and receiving messages.  Anything that can be interpreted as a symbol—actions as well as words and images—can be used to communicate.  This includes physical communication, in which actions rather than data 
convey the intended message.  Importantly, the act of transmitting a message does not constitute communication.  Communication occurs only when the signal is received and interpreted, so it is not sufficient merely to “get our message out.” 

Communication works this way: A source puts out a signal intended to convey a meaning.  The receiver recognizes and selects the signal, if he chooses, from among the various signals available to him; he interprets the signal based on his own frame of reference and interests to create meaning.  While the source may have an intended meaning in mind, it is the receiver who actually provides the ultimate meaning, which may or may not be the meaning the source intended.  The challenge in effective communication is to anticipate what signal will trigger the desired interpretation.

**Complexity in Communication**
No social communication system is as simple as a source and receiver with an exclusive channel between them.  Instead, social communication systems tend to be complex networks in which numerous nodes act simultaneously as sources, receivers and relayers.  A relayer is an entity or node that passes a message between a sender and a receiver.  Any source and receiver can have numerous direct or indirect channels connecting them, some of which they may not even know about and each of which imposes different levels of distortion on the signal such that the same source output will reach the receiver as different signals.  A source will often send multiple signals to the same receiver, intentionally or not, and while some of these signals may be mutually compatible, others may be contradictory.  Any receiver will receive signals from multiple sources.  Sources must compete for the attention of their intended audiences, who will tend to select and decode those signals that appear to suit their purposes and conform to their existing frames of reference.  Any given signal is likely to reach more than one receiver, intentionally or not, and may be interpreted differently by each when it does.  As a network becomes increasingly interconnected, it will be increasingly difficult to ensure that signals reach intended audiences only.  Any node receiving and interpreting a signal can relay that signal to others, invariably changing it in the process, sometimes significantly and sometimes intentionally, and exacerbating the problem of controlling which audiences receive what signals. 

The result of all this is that it is usually very difficult, if not impossible, to isolate the effect of any individual signal on any individual audience.  Assessing the cognitive impact of a signal is much more difficult, for example, than assessing the physical impact of an air strike on a target.  While it is possible to observe the actions of a given audience after receiving a certain signal, it might not be possible to observe directly audience perceptions and attitudes, nor definitely link perceptions and attitudes to specific signals.  Finally, evaluating the effectiveness of any communication must consider not only the effect on the intended audience, but also the effect on the broader system.  It is possible to have the desired effect on the intended audience, but have undesirable effects on other audiences that completely undermine the ultimate value of the communication.

**Communication in the Information Age**
Social communication has always been a complex phenomenon; in the future, it will only get more complex as the globe becomes increasingly interconnected by digital communication networks.  Information will travel farther and faster than ever before, reaching more people than ever.  Even in so-called remote areas of the world, many people will be electronically connected to world events in near real-time.  Information that appeals to a critical mass of interests will spread around the globe near instantaneously.  In this interconnected environment, it will be difficult to control information flow.  It will be practically impossible to control the distribution of signals to only one audience; information will bleed over to multiple audiences, either through direct transmission or relay by intermediate nodes.  Information will be less geographically restrained; information originating in one region of the world can have a significant, or even greater, effect in another.  This flood of digital information will supplement rather than replace more traditional forms of communication.  Information will still spread through local communities by word of mouth and other traditional media, such as print. 

This future world will be characterized by increased visibility and transparency.  The future joint force commander will have to assume that every action of the force will be observed and reported to a variety of audiences.  Every action will therefore send a signal, whether intentional or not, that can be received and interpreted differently by a variety of audiences. 

Where once political information was monopolized by a relatively small number of governments and media giants, in the future there will be vastly greater numbers of information sources—such as weblogs or podcasts or whatever will evolve after them—catering to niche audiences.  Not only will more people than ever before have access to more information, but each will also become a potential information source, contributing images and text, facts and opinion to the global network.  People will have far more choices when it comes to their information sources and will be able to select sources that more closely reflect and reinforce their own perspectives, making it harder for sources with differing perspectives to be heard. 

Any deliberate USG communication effort could be hampered by the natural diversity of other American signals.  The signals that America transmits to the world are not uniform or consistent.  American signals are transmitted not only by official government agencies acting deliberately, but also by other “representatives” such as businessmen, students, tourists, advertisers, entertainers and members of the news media.  While the USG may be able to control and coordinate the signals its various agencies put out, it will not be able to control the signals of these other sources.

**Four Basic Goals for Strategic Communication**
In the complex environment described above, the joint force (and the United States more broadly) will have four basic goals for strategic communication: 
1. Improve U.S. credibility and legitimacy.  Credibility and legitimacy refer to joint force actions and messages as well as the generic perception of the U.S. by selected audiences.  Credibility equates to capacity for belief while legitimacy is to show or affirm to be justified.  There is a continuous requirement to try to improve the U.S. brand image with various audiences around the world.  The premise is that increased credibility and legitimacy will eventually result in favorable attitudes and behaviors toward the U.S.  This goal applies to both general populations and governments or other policy-making bodies.  This case involves effectively communicating shared values and interests.  It involves consistently and clearly communicating U.S. policies and objectives as well as encouraging credible third parties (e.g., foreign leaders, media, and key influencers) to convey our message.  It also involves demonstrating goodwill and the willingness to cooperate with other global and regional actors.  It will depend at least as much on actions as on statements.  Examples include international exercises, defense support to public diplomacy, and aid and training packages. 
2. Weaken an adversary’s credibility and legitimacy.  This case involves degrading the audience’s attitudes toward our competitors and foes—possibly in the context of a war of ideas.  The audience here is any group that might be susceptible to the influence of one of our competitors or adversaries—adversary supporters, neutrals or even partners of ours.  Like the previous case, this applies equally to general populations and specific policy-making entities.  The ultimate aim is to decrease support for the adversary among selected audiences.  Examples include discrediting competitor or adversary ideologies or policies, countering competitor or adversary propaganda, and exposing adversary misdeeds and lies. 
3. Convince selected audiences to take specific actions that support U.S. or international objectives.  The audiences in this case are friends or neutrals that the joint force commander believes he can affect to take supportive actions.  This case applies to more specific policy-making entities—such as governments, militaries, corporations or nongovernmental organizations—rather than to general populations, but not exclusively.  Where the previous cases attempt to focus on general perceptions and attitudes, this case attempts to work more immediately on behaviors.  Efforts could include convincing a military partner to undertake specific operations, inducing another nation to offer basing or access rights, convincing a nongovernmental organization to undertake operations in an area, or convincing a population to reject an insurgent movement and support the government. 
4. Cause a competitor or adversary to take (or refrain from taking) specific actions.  The audience in this case is the competitor or adversary himself.  Since competitors and enemies will tend to be policy-making entities such as governments or insurgent movements, rather than general populations, this case will tend to apply more to the former than the latter.  Examples include defense support to public diplomacy, deterrence operations and military deception.

### Notes

1. This does not mean that the joint force will not take measures to deceive an adversary.  Military deception can be thought of as a form of persuasion based on intentionally misleading information.  See Appendix B for the definitions for deception and military deception. 

2.  David K. Berlo, The Process of Communication:  An Introduction to Theory and Practice (New York:  Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1960), p. 11-12.  “Our basic purpose in communication is to become an affecting agent, to affect others, our physical environment, and ourselves, to become a determining agent, to have a vote in how things are.  In short, we communicate to influence—to affect with intent.”