# STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION JIC V1.0 07 October 2009 Section 5

## THE OPERATIONAL SOLUTION:  INFORMED AND ADAPTIVE LISTENING AND SIGNALING TO AFFECT PERCEPTIONS, ATTITUDES AND BELIEFS 

The central idea describing how a joint force commander could plan and execute joint operations to achieve strategic communication objectives is this:  In the context of a broader national strategy and in conjunction with other agencies and organizations as appropriate, the joint force commander of 2016-2028 will employ the full range of informational and other capabilities available to the force in an integrated and timely way to: 
- (1) identify, segment, study and listen to potential audiences; 
- (2) conceive, produce and coordinate signals through both information and actions designed to affect the perceptions attitudes, beliefs and thus the behaviors of selected audiences in ways that support the accomplishment of the mission and promote broader national interests; 
- (3) monitor, measure and assess the effects of these signals; and 
- (4) iteratively modify actions and information products based on feedback on the effects of the signals. 

The two critical elements of this concept, upon which everything else depends, are understanding potential audiences and assessing the effects of signals on audiences.  These can be expressed in terms of two hypotheses that are at the heart of this concept: 
1. If the joint force commander can better understand audience perceptions, attitudes and beliefs, then he will naturally produce signals that are better designed to affect the behaviors of selected populations, governments or other decision-making groups. 
2. If the joint force commander can better assess the effects of the joint force’s and others’ signals on various audiences, then he will be better able to adapt joint force signals to improve their effect. 

This concept posits that strategic communication in 2016-2028 will not be an adjunct activity, but will be inherent in the planning and conduct of all operations.8  All operations will be planned and executed with consideration not only of the physical results they achieve, but also of their influence on the attitudes and behaviors of various groups.  Commanders and staffs at all levels will understand that others’ attitudes are critical to U.S. success and will incorporate this understanding into all planning and execution.  The supporting ideas, essential capabilities, and implications within this concept amplify how future joint forces can ensure their ability to envision, plan, train for, and execute operations to achieve strategic communication objectives. 

Even as strategic communication becomes an inherent part of the overall operation planning and execution process, it will remain important to integrate the communication activities that are fed into that overall process.  This concept envisions that the commander will maintain a senior staff advisor with direct access whose duty is to focus on issues of influence and advocate for the use of communication capabilities.  Likewise, this concept envisions that some task-organized, cross-disciplinary body within a joint force will exist to recommend communication objectives and tasks, arbitrate disagreements, and deconflict actions through a single vetting process, the outputs of which feed into the overall planning and execution process.  Another key role for this body would be to anticipate and advise on the possible unintended impact of other proposed activities on the attitudes of key groups, and anticipate and preempt adversarial actions to undermine our efforts among various audiences. 

The following supporting ideas elaborate the central idea above: 
1. Integrate joint force actions to maximize the desired effect on selected audiences.9  Because of the noise and competing signals in the information environment, successful strategic communication will rarely result from a single signal, but will require complementary signals from multiple sources.  A critical element of success will be integrating the various actions and information outputs of the force to ensure that signals reinforce or complement one another—and do not compete or contradict.  It is essential that information and actions be aligned since few things will damage credibility and legitimacy more than a disconnect between what is said and what is done.  The integration of physical actions and information outputs will occur within a single operation planning and execution process, as discussed above.  The joint force will not necessarily “speak with one voice,” but with harmonious voices—there is a difference—since the situation will rarely be universal across an area of operations. 

The joint force commander will integrate actions and information efforts using time-tested methods developed for achieving integration in other disciplines.  First, he will exercise command authority through the operational chain of command.  Based on guidance from above (starting with guidance from political leaders), commanders at each echelon will establish guidance for their subordinate commanders, while still providing the subordinates the necessary latitude to adjust to local conditions.  In this way, nested top-down guidance will provide unity of effort to all operations. 

At the same time, the joint force commander will flexibly and quickly create task-organized, cross-disciplinary bodies as needed to provide functional integration and expertise to the planning and execution process.  The composition of these bodies will depend on the situation, but for coordinating activities that support achieving SC objectives it would routinely include PA, PSYOP, visual information (VI), J2, J3, J39, and civil affairs/engineering with representatives as needed from the staff judge advocate, and coalition PA staffs and others as appropriate.  In creating these entities in the future, the commander will routinely be able to identify, locate and access the necessary expertise, both internal and external to the force.  Thanks to distributed collaboration capabilities, participation will be independent of geographic location.  These entities will collaborate to build mutual understanding of the situation as it pertains to communication efforts.  All elements of the joint force will have timely visibility into the commander’s communication guidance, as well as into the communication capabilities and efforts of other units.  Based on this, elements at all echelons will self-synchronize to a significant degree, coordinating their efforts laterally rather than requiring centralized orchestration from above.  They will also have visibility into the results of others’ influence efforts, and will be able to incorporate those lessons quickly into their own methods as appropriate.  In this way, lessons will spread quickly through the force, increasing the adaptability of the overall effort.

2. Coordinate joint strategic communication efforts with the efforts of other agencies and organizations within guidance provided by higher authority.  Joint strategic communication efforts must fit within the designs of the larger national effort.  The joint force commander’s first strategic communication responsibility is not to undermine existing national strategic communication efforts.  Open communication channels with national leadership through which the joint force commander will receive explicit guidance as to broad national themes and overall intent with respect to various audiences are envisioned.  As a representative of the USG with insight into a regional situation, the joint force commander will be prepared to provide input to the national guidance as required and will advise the national leadership on potential military contributions to exercising influence at the national level.  Importantly, the joint force commander should also provide feedback on the results of joint strategic communication efforts including various partner efforts to the national leadership to better inform subsequent policy decisions.  While the joint effort takes its direction from national guidance, national guidance should also be shaped from below. 

Aligning joint efforts with efforts of the other actors with a role in strategic communication will require a significant level of cooperation.  Future strategic communication at the interagency level will become a fundamentally collaborative process.  The joint force will coordinate its communication efforts with a wide range of domestic and foreign government agencies and private, corporate, academic and other organizations.  Any organization able to affect the strategic situation in the joint operations area is a potential partner; the list in the future will only grow.  The joint force will participate in various inter-organizational bodies at different levels to collaborate in understanding potential audiences, establishing objectives, conceiving and delivering signals, coordinating and deconflicting those signals, and monitoring and assessing the effects of those signals.  This will first require identifying appropriate partners in any given situation—which may be far from a trivial task—and then establishing an effective working relationship.  Some partnerships may be habitual and well established, while others will be ad hoc, requiring considerable organizational flexibility on the part of the joint force.  The specific working relationships and their organizational solutions will vary from situation to situation.  In any event, given the wide range of potential partners, this supporting idea will require the building of effective cross-cultural collaboration based on significant information sharing. 

Because the joint force may provide the most significant U.S. presence in a given region, the joint force commander will be prepared to support the objectives of other agencies and partners.  Since information in the globally interconnected future will not recognize geographical boundaries, the joint force commander will routinely find it necessary to cooperate with partners outside the joint operations area whose actions can have a significant impact within that area. 

3. Conduct a continuous engagement program within the joint operations area with respect to selected key audiences, as the foundation for all other communication efforts.  Regardless of the future joint force commander’s specific goals and operations, he will undergird them with a continuous and significant program to actively build U.S. credibility and strengthen relationships within the joint operations area.  The overall goal is to build the credibility of and international support for U.S. goals and initiatives. This general situation will provide the basis for exercising other, more specific influence when the time comes. 

Communication will tend to take the form of two-way dialogue, although there will certainly be opportunities for unilateral communication (especially demonstrations of support).  This will require demonstrating as much willingness to listen and be influenced as the desire to transmit and influence.  A significant part of this effort will involve learning about the other actors in the region.  Significantly, this engagement program will provide the basis for the deep situational understanding that is critical to this concept.  By building habitual relationships, this program will also establish and strengthen communication channels, improving the quality of communication over time. 

Sustaining a continuous engagement program is a challenge for the joint force commander.  Potentially, a strategic communication challenge can occur during the transition between military controlling headquarters, say from a combatant command to a subordinate joint task force.  A seam can evolve in continuity of SC-related actions.  To mitigate or prevent such a harmful seam, the higher headquarters may retain its SC role for an extended timeframe or, over time, relinquish its control in terms of strategic communication activities to its subordinate command(s) when the subordinate command is prepared for the mission hand-off.  Obviously, the appropriate course of action is situationally dependent. 

Demonstrating through consistent actions at every echelon that the United States will be a cooperative and reliable member of the regional and global communities and will support common regional and global goals will be critical to this effort. 

Examples of specific activities within such an engagement program could include:  extensive public affairs efforts in a wide variety of media (to include new media, such as weblogs) to explain U.S. interests, objectives and values; military exchange programs; military and sports diplomacy; official and unofficial visits; multilateral exercises; training assistance; foreign internal defense; and logistical support.  Importantly, the future joint force commander will routinely look for and quickly exploit opportunities to provide humanitarian assistance in cases of natural and manmade disasters. 

4. Conceive every action based on its potential cognitive impact, consequences and effects on various audiences in the joint operations area and beyond.  The foundation of this concept is attitudinal:  The concept is based first and foremost on all personnel taking the approach that every action of the joint force, at every echelon, can have a strategic impact.  Every output of the joint force—from a theater-wide concept of operations, to an individual information product, or the conduct of a single traffic control point—sends a signal that will affect people’s perceptions, attitudes and beliefs, and thereby their actions.  This signal is not merely an unavoidable side effect of the action, but may be a fundamental reason for the action.  Every one of these actions should be guided by an understanding of the desired perceived message. 

This does not mean that actions with potentially negative impacts on people’s perceptions or attitudes will not be taken.  Actions to affect physical conditions will often be necessary, regardless of the potential negative psychological impact.  Most operations, in fact, have the potential to affect some constituency negatively.  Nevertheless, these decisions should be made with as full an appreciation as possible of potential negative effects, which might then be mitigated at best with preemptive informational efforts or at least with timely explanations. 

5. Actively engage in the debate over joint actions.  Practically all actions in the future will be observed, captured and disseminated via multiple mediums and subjected to interpretation and debate.  In this environment, it will not be enough merely to act intelligently, as discussed above.  It will be just as important to engage in the debate over how to interpret those actions.  Often it will be best to initiate the debate in advance on joint force terms.  One cannot assume that good intentions and deeds will be interpreted as such by others.  Rather, one must assume that opponents will intentionally and aggressively spin joint force actions in negative ways.  In the words of John D. Rockefeller:  “Next to doing the right thing, the most important thing is to let people know you are doing the right thing.”  It will be important to explain actions and objectives to the various interested parties.  It will be important to dispel misconceptions and disinformation about joint force and others’ actions, preemptively when possible.  Some actions will unavoidably have unexpected effects on some audiences; it will be important to reinforce or attempt to mitigate these effects with candid and timely (even preemptive) information products. 

Because of the speed at which information will move in the future and because the first interpretation of an event will tend to set the frame of reference for the ensuing discussion, it will be important to get out in front of the discussion to set the agenda.  The principle of seizing the initiative will apply as much to the cognitive domain as to the physical one. 

6. Anticipate, monitor, understand and quickly counter or exploit the influence efforts of adversaries and competitors.  Adversaries and competitors will try to exert influence, in accordance with their interests.  They will do this by promoting their own cause and by spreading disinformation about us.  Especially in a war of ideas, it will be critical to continuously monitor and understand these attempts and counter them quickly.  This requires exposing misinformation, contradictions and inconsistencies in adversary messages; identifying inconsistencies between adversary messages and actions; and undermining adversary messages by providing alternatives.  Speed is an essential part of this idea because the longer a damaging idea is allowed to exist uncontested, the more difficult it will be to counter.  It is not possible to counter every adversary message with respect to every audience, so it will be important to decide what messages to counter and with which audiences. 

7. Develop deep knowledge of selected audiences to the point that courses of action start to become intuitive.  This is a critical aspect of this concept.  The premise is that if one can reach a meaningful understanding of the audience, then an appropriate message will appear naturally.  Figuring out exactly how to formulate, package and transmit the message is important—and relates to three existing competencies—but the best packaging will not matter much if joint force leaders misunderstand the audience.  This is a way of saying that the basis of effective strategic communication is good listening. 

Traditional planning procedures portray decision-making as a rational process of generating multiple courses of action and comparing them in parallel to select the optimal solution.  This approach is based on the classical, analytical model of decision-making, which initially dominated the field of decision research, but which has largely been invalidated in the last three decades.  Today, human decision-making is widely recognized to be a largely intuitive process based on the ability to size up a situation and mentally project how a course of action might turn out.  In complex operational situations, decision makers do not try to optimize, but instead satisfice—look for the first satisfactory solution. Research shows that experienced decision makers actual spend considerably more time assessing a situation, because they appreciate complexities that inexperienced decision makers do not.  However, once experienced decision makers assess the situation they decide on a course of action much more quickly. In other words, experienced decision makers focus their efforts on understanding the situation rather than generating courses of action.

8. Formulate and produce tailored, resonant and culturally attuned signals that reach intended audiences through the surrounding noise.  This is the actual conceiving and putting out of informational and physical signals.  This supporting idea involves several critical judgments that are the natural outgrowth of understanding the intended audience and the broader communication system in play.  The joint force commander and staff decide whom the intended audience is, and decide what attitudinal or behavioral response is desired as the result of the communication.  Then they identify the key opinion leaders within the intended audience.  It is not necessary—or even possible—to reach and sway an entire audience.  Rather, it is important to reach the opinion leaders whom the rest of the audience will follow.  Likewise, it is generally preferable to target undecided or moderate audiences—those who are more likely to be open to different arguments—rather than hardline supporters or opponents, who are less likely to be swayed in any event. 

The joint force staff then decides what source initiates the signal.  In some cultures, the credibility of the source is more important than the logical or emotional appeal of the message itself.  In many cases, this will necessarily mean using indigenous sources or sources not directly associated with the U.S. military or USG.  Finally, decide what media or channels to employ.  This depends on what channels are most useful in reaching the intended audience—through what media does the audience receive most of its information?  In many cases, this will involve using a variety of media in combination—although in the future it will increasingly mean an emphasis on use of the internet and other interactive electronic media.

The joint force formulates and packages the actual signal, whether it is an informational output or an action.  The signal must be appealing to the intended audience in some way.  Even if the intent is to fundamentally change the audiences’ thinking on some subject,
something about the signal must be compatible with the audience’s existing mental model to cause that audience to select it from all the other signals with which it is being bombarded.  Because societies are fragmenting into ever-smaller identity groups and because any signal in an interconnected information environment is likely to escape its intended audience, our signals in the future will have to have specific appeal to the intended audience while maintaining general appeal to the broader audience it may reach.  Ideally, the signal should be self-replicating or viral, meaning that the signal is passed naturally through the intended audience rather than our having to push it to every recipient. 

None of these decisions are simple; all are ultimately a matter of operational art.  All of these activities can benefit from incorporating some of the advanced public relations, marketing, advertising and political campaigning techniques currently in practice.  Additionally, a system that seeks, experiments with, and develops new means and mediums to plan and execute joint operations to achieve strategic communication objectives is required.  This in turn requires advanced training and education for future military leaders in areas such as modeling and simulation; social, cultural, and cognitive psychology; decision-making in complex situations; and polling.

9. Focus on the opinion leaders and moderates.  An audience or audience segment is not a unitary mass.  Rather, any selected audience is a collection of nodes connected together in a network.  It is not necessary to reach an entire intended audience directly to sway that audience.  Some nodes are more influential than others in shaping the perceptions, attitudes, beliefs and behaviors of the broader audience.  These nodes can be thought of as opinion leaders; they are considered “credible voices.”  In network terms, they are known as hubs—nodes with far more connections than most nodes. 

Some nodes in an audience are more susceptible to being swayed than others.  Some nodes will be hard-liners—entrenched in their beliefs—such that no argument is likely to sway them from their current positions, or even cause them to seriously reconsider those positions.  Hard-liners can be for us or against us.  Some nodes will be soft-liners—those whose positions are not entrenched and who are therefore susceptible to being swayed.  They might be neutral or weakly for or against us; but in any case, they are subject to being swayed.  They can be likened to swing voters in an election. 

Our determinations for whom to focus our communication efforts should be based on the dual considerations of who is most influential within an audience and who is most susceptible to our message.  Whom do the joint force leaders most want to influence and who are joint force leaders best able to influence? 

While it is necessary to protect our base of support, joint force leaders should generally not spend a lot of energy on any hard-liners, who are not likely to be swayed one way or the other.  To deal with hardliners, the joint force and partners take concerted actions to isolate these hard-liners from their traditional support base whenever possible, thus threatening their levels of assumed power and authority.  Instead, joint force leaders and partners should focus on those segments of an audience who are most open to being swayed.  At the same time, in order to get the greatest effect for our efforts, joint force leaders and partners should focus on those nodes with the greatest ability to influence other nodes.  Focusing on opinion leaders and soft-liners applies to both 
understanding them and signaling them. 

10. Adapt continuously and iteratively based on feedback about the effects of our signals.  The premise of this supporting idea is that no strategic communication plan will ever be completely correct or account for every contingency.  The complex and dynamic operational situations that joint force leaders will face will simply be unknowable.  Despite their best efforts to understand the situation, joint force leaders will get things wrong.  They will fail to anticipate certain consequences of their signals.  Joint force leaders, at times, will fail to understand how the signal will mutate as it spreads though the social network.  They will fail to identify unintended audiences affected by our messages.  And once the joint force acts, the situation will change. 

This concept applies a heuristic approach to strategic communication; it is essentially the scientific method applied to the challenge of influence.  Each decision is not viewed as a final answer, but amounts to a hypothesis about the situation:  If we do X, then we expect the result to be Y.  Each action becomes a test of that hypothesis.  Every result then provides the basis for adapting our actions.  Strategic communication will unfold as a continuous learning process.  Joint force leaders will never reach an ideal solution because the situation will continue to evolve—in part, in response to our actions—but, if joint force leaders are adaptive enough, they can move iteratively toward a better solution. 

Critical to making strategic communication an adaptive process will be establishing meaningful measures for assessing the effectiveness of our actions and recognizing the longer time frames (perhaps years) to observe these measures.  It may be possible to develop a generic set of such measures, which could serve as a baseline, but these would have to be adapted for each situation.  This could have important implications for doctrine, training and intelligence.  As a principle, joint force leaders should take no action without having first identified the expected impact on attitudes or behaviors and then established quantitative or qualitative measures for assessing that impact.  Establishing meaningful measures for strategic communication and having the patience to observe these measures will be a very difficult challenge, involving elements of both art and science, and likely will have significant institutional implications, especially in the areas of doctrine, training and education. 

11. Decentralize strategic communication at each level within broad parameters established by higher authority.  Decentralization of the joint strategic communication effort is the only feasible way to generate the speed and adaptability required by the complex and real-time dynamics of the future information environment.  This concept envisions that commanders at all levels, imbued with a solid understanding of higher intent and informed by a deep appreciation for the audience, will implement the necessary informational and physical actions without the need for detailed guidance from higher authority but in conformity with higher designs.  This will require seniors at all levels to provide communication guidance that establishes necessary limits while still allowing wide latitude for the use of judgment in execution.  It requires that lower echelons have release authority for various information products.  The delegated authority to decentralize actions must include authorities to assess and report.  Without decentralization of assessment and reporting, it might be impossible for any commander to monitor and interpret indicators across a vast range of issues, in many locations and at all levels. 

Based on greater transparency facilitated by networked command and control, unity of effort will result more from horizontal self-synchronization and less from centralized synchronization imposed by higher authority.  Different elements of the joint force will have greater visibility into the communication capabilities and efforts of others and will be able to align their efforts locally without reference to higher authority.  This said, mistakes will occur in any decentralized system, and so there needs to be a command atmosphere that accepts reasonable mistakes, but is quick to address them.

Decentralization will naturally provide greater diversity of actions.  This diversity can be exploited to increase adaptability, as the most successful techniques are disseminated quickly throughout the force and then modified, or even improved, by others in a process of continuous evolution. 